VMDistributed CR: orchestrate VMCluster upgrades (#1556)
VictoriaMetrics/operator: docs/resources/vmdistributedcluster.md

---
weight: 12
title: VMDistributedCluster
menu:
  docs:
    identifier: operator-cr-vmdistributedcluster
    parent: operator-cr
    weight: 12
aliases:
  - /operator/resources/vmdistributedcluster/
tags:
  - CRD
  - VMDistributedCluster
---

`VMDistributedCluster` is the Custom Resource Definition for orchestrated update of several VictoriaMetrics clusters. It allows you to define and manage cluster components of a distributed VictoriaMetrics setup and apply changes to them without downtime or disruption.

For a high-level overview of VictoriaMetrics distributed cluster architecture, refer to the official [VictoriaMetrics documentation](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/cluster-victoriametrics/).

## Specification

The `VMDistributedCluster` resource allows you to configure various aspects of your VictoriaMetrics distributed cluster. The specification includes details about:

*   `paused`: If set to `true`, the operator will not perform any actions on the underlying managed objects. Useful for temporarily halting reconciliation.
*   `zones`: A list of objects, where each entry either defines or references a `VMCluster` instance.

> *   `vmagent`: A reference to a `VMAgent` object that will be configured to scrape metrics from all `VMCluster` instances managed by this `VMDistributedCluster`.

Reviewer: `vmagent` here should be described as the global write endpoint in this setup, which replicates data to all zones. It may not perform scraping at all, and only accept remote write requests from other clients.

A `VMClusterRefOrSpec` object has the following mutually exclusive fields:

*   `ref`: A `corev1.LocalObjectReference` pointing to an existing `VMCluster` object by name. If `ref` is specified, `name` and `spec` are ignored.
*   `overrideSpec`: An optional JSON object that specifies an override to the `VMClusterSpec` of the referenced object when `ref` is used. This allows applying common configuration changes across referenced clusters without modifying their original definitions.
*   `name`: A static name to be used for the `VMCluster` when `spec` is provided. This field is ignored if `ref` is specified.
*   `spec`: A `vmv1beta1.VMClusterSpec` object that defines the desired state of a new `VMCluster`. This field is ignored if `ref` is specified.

**Example: Defining a `VMDistributedCluster` with inline `VMCluster` specifications for two zones:**

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.victoriametrics.com/v1alpha1
kind: VMDistributedCluster
metadata:
  name: my-distributed-cluster
spec:
  vmagent:
    name: my-distributed-vmagent
  vmusers:

>     - name: my-read-user-for-zone-a

Reviewer: Please provide yaml for the example vmusers too, since the routing policy also matters.

            replicaCount: 1
      - name: zone-b
        spec:
          vmstorage:
            replicaCount: 1
            storage:
              volumeClaimTemplate:
                spec:
                  resources:
                    requests:
                      storage: 10Gi
          vmselect:
            replicaCount: 1
          vminsert:
            replicaCount: 1
  paused: false
```

**Example: Referencing existing `VMCluster` objects and applying an `overrideSpec`:**

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.victoriametrics.com/v1alpha1
kind: VMDistributedCluster
metadata:
  name: referenced-distributed-cluster
spec:
  zones:
    - vmclusters:
        ref:
          name: existing-cluster-zone-1
        overrideSpec:
          vmstorage: # Increase PVC for vmstorage in this zone
            storage:
              volumeClaimTemplate:
                spec:
                  resources:
                    requests:
                      storage: 20Gi
    - vmclusters:
        ref:
          name: existing-cluster-zone-2
        overrideSpec:
          vmstorage: # Increase vmstorage replicas for this zone
            replicaCount: 2
```

### Current shortcomings

> - When VMDistributedCluster is removed, all resources created inline are not deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a VMCluster is created by VMDistributedCluster, its resources won’t be deleted when VMDistributedCluster is deleted.
```
Since the inline resources only include vmcluster, let's make it clearer.
